---
title:   "Using OpenCV to add face and eye detection to the app"
date:    2018-06-18 16:40:11
excerpt: "Using OpenCV HAAR cascades to add face and eye detection to the app."

---
Since I have used OpenCV before, I will start with that even though it looks
like other options could be better. Even if it is not trivial to integrate
with a Swift iOS app, it is not that difficult either. OpenCV is C++ and
talking to C++ from Swift can't be done directly but can be done from
Objective C so that is used as a bridge.

OpenCV has [a number of pretrained HAAR cascades models suitable for face
and eye detection](https://github.com/opencv/opencv/tree/master/data/haarcascades)
that can be used directly. After testing a lot of different things, I settled
on using the `haarcascade_frontalface_alt2` model for detecting faces and
then within the detected area, using individual detectors for each eye
(`haarcascade_lefteye_2splits` and `haarcascade_righteye_2splits`). These
detectors seem to be faster but tend to fail more often than the more
general models so if detection fails, I use a fallback model
(`haarcascade_eye_tree_eyeglasses`, not that infants wear eye glasses, it is
just practical for testing on myself).

<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/45lLY1QMLxw" frameborder="0"
allow="autoplay; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>

As can be seen, face and eye detection is pretty good but a slightly different
area is found every frame so there is a lot of jitter. Also, the eye regions
found seem unnecessarily large vertically, although I've noticed that some
pupil localization algorithms use the eyebrows, so maybe not.

The most difficult part here is setting good cascade parameters. First, the
detections can be slow (and that goes especially for the eye detection) so if
we can limit the size range, especially downwards, of the detected features
it should help a lot. However, it is not obvious from what distance the app
would be used. Perhaps the maximum distance (minimum size) will be limited
by the pupil detection accuracy?

Second, there are some parameters that essentially give better accuracy
but less detections. They also seems correlated to detection speed to me
so I'm not sure if it's worth it, especially since it does not seem to
solve the issue of the detection being unstable in terms of area.
